GCP UPI: document how to install into a Shared VPC (#3278)
openshift/installer: docs/user/gcp/install_upi.md

* gcloud authenticated to an account with [additional](iam.md) roles:
  * Deployment Manager Editor
  * Service Account Key Admin

>   * Compute Network User (for any [Shared VPC][sharedvpc] subnets)

Reviewer: shared vpc, for less gcp involved, could easily be sharing vpc in the same project or for more gcp involved would mean XPN. I think we will be better served if we make it explicitly clear here. _people don't always follow link_

Author: Will update to [Shared VPC (XPN)][sharedvpc]

Author: Resolved in 657a91d789da80eb9e2e96efc4ded29f490d64a9

### Create an install config
Create an install configuration as for [the usual approach](install.md#create-configuration).

If you are installing into a [Shared VPC (XPN)][sharedvpc],
the installer will not be able to find the base domain zone in the host project.
Create the `install-config.yaml` manually using the documentation references/examples.

> It must have `publish: Internal` to avoid the base domain verification when executing `create manifests` later in this workflow.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create the `install-config.yaml` manually using the documentation references/examples.
It must have `publish: Internal` because the installer will not be able to find the public DNS zone for the the base domain in the host project, which is required for the External clusters.
```

Author: ptal 67658b5fca0aeaa92b80e428086fdd30037dfc9d

> This can be reversed in a step [below](enable-external-ingress-optional).

Reviewer: this needs to be a separate section..

Author: 67658b5fca0aeaa92b80e428086fdd30037dfc9d

> This dummy zone will not be needed after the Ignition files have been created.

Reviewer: a) make sure we make it clear that Shared VPC (XPN) is different from Sharing VPC in the same project

Reviewer: b) This dummy workarounds shouldn't be what we document for our users, if I saw something like that in _some project_ I would rather not use that project. Clearly state the restriction that only Internal will work for XPN.

Author: Updated with 998a518a17e54a792bd52cf31b217775eb20f5a3

### Create an install config
Create an install configuration as for [the usual approach](install.md#create-configuration).

If you are installing into a [Shared VPC][sharedvpc],
the installer will not be able to find the base domain zone in the host project.

> You must either create the install-config another way, or select another zone in the service project and then update the `install-config.yaml` manually.

Reviewer: I think we should request the user to create install-config.yaml manually using the docs references/examples
and request that the publish be set to Internal.

we can add a NOTE that this is a restriction today for XPN.

Author: Resolved in 657a91d789da80eb9e2e96efc4ded29f490d64a9

### Remove DNS Zones (Optional)
If you don't want [the ingress operator][ingress-operator] to create DNS records on your behalf, remove the `privateZone` and `publicZone` sections from the DNS configuration.
If you do so, you'll need to [add ingress DNS records manually](#add-the-ingress-dns-records) later on.

> This is recommended if you are installing a cluster into a Shared VPC unless the master/worker service accounts have access to update DNS records in the host project.

Reviewer: afaik, this is incorrect, the master/worker SAs don't interact with dns zones, but the ingress-operator SAs

Author: Updated with 998a518a17e54a792bd52cf31b217775eb20f5a3

open(path, "w").write(yaml.dump(data, default_flow_style=False))'
```

```console
spec:
  mastersSchedulable: false
  policy:

>     name: ''

Reviewer: i think we can drop these.. seems like noise

```

### Remove DNS Zones (Optional)
If you don't want [the ingress operator][ingress-operator] to create DNS records on your behalf, remove the `privateZone` and `publicZone` sections from the DNS configuration.
If you do so, you'll need to [add ingress DNS records manually](#add-the-ingress-dns-records) later on.

If you are installing into a [Shared VPC][sharedvpc],

> remove these sections.

Reviewer: nit: `these` should probably be expanded on..

Author: Resolved in 657a91d789da80eb9e2e96efc4ded29f490d64a9

open(path, "w").write(yaml.dump(data, default_flow_style=False))'
```

### Update the cloud-provider manifest (optional)
If you are installing into a Shared VPC, update the cloud provider configuration so it understands the network and subnetworks are in a different project (host project).
The service account used to install the cluster, and the master/worker service accounts created later in this document must all have `roles/compute.networkUser` access to each of the host project subnets used by the cluster.

> This can be achieved using `compute networks subnets set-iam-policy`.

Reviewer: This feels out of the place. i think this needs to be moved to some other location.

Author: Updated with 998a518a17e54a792bd52cf31b217775eb20f5a3

```sh
export HOST_PROJECT="example-shared-vpc"
export HOST_PROJECT_NETWORK_NAME="example-network"
export HOST_PROJECT_COMPUTE_SUBNET_NAME="example-worker-subnet"

sed -i "s/    subnetwork-name.*/    network-project-id = ${HOST_PROJECT}\\n    network-name    = ${HOST_PROJECT_NETWORK_NAME}\\n    subnetwork-name = ${HOST_PROJECT_COMPUTE_SUBNET_NAME}/" manifests/cloud-provider-config.yaml

> ```

Reviewer: this is fine, but i think i would rather document what the users need to do in terms of what the end result should look like.
a way to achieve this is good in addition to above.

Author: Updated with 998a518a17e54a792bd52cf31b217775eb20f5a3

open(path, "w").write(yaml.dump(data, default_flow_style=False))'
```

```console
spec:
  baseDomain: example.com
```

### Update the cloud-provider manifest (optional)
If you are installing into a [Shared VPC][sharedvpc],

> update the cloud provider configuration so it understands the network and subnetworks are in a different project (host project).

Reviewer: The title/first section must mention this section is only for shared vpc xpn and other can just skip this.

```sh
export HOST_PROJECT="example-shared-vpc"
export HOST_PROJECT_NETWORK_NAME="example-network"
export HOST_PROJECT_COMPUTE_SUBNET_NAME="example-worker-subnet"

sed -i "s/    subnetwork-name.*/    network-project-id = ${HOST_PROJECT}\\n    network-name    = ${HOST_PROJECT_NETWORK_NAME}\\n    subnetwork-name = ${HOST_PROJECT_COMPUTE_SUBNET_NAME}/" manifests/cloud-provider-config.yaml
```

```console
  config: |+
    [global]
    project-id      = example-project
    regional        = true
    multizone       = true
    node-tags       = opensh-ptzzx-master
    node-tags       = opensh-ptzzx-worker
    node-instance-prefix = opensh-ptzzx
    external-instance-groups-prefix = opensh-ptzzx
    network-project-id = example-shared-vpc
    network-name    = example-network
    subnetwork-name = example-worker-subnet
```

### Enable external ingress (optional)
If you are installing into a [Shared VPC (XPN)][sharedvpc],
and you set `publish: Internal` in the `install-config.yaml` but really wanted `publish: External`
then remove the `cluster-ingress-default-ingresscontroller` manifest to enable external ingress.

```sh
rm -f manifests/cluster-ingress-default-ingresscontroller.yaml

> ```

Reviewer: hmm, i don't think removing is a solution that the ingress team will like, this probably needs to update the object correctly.

Author: This file only exists when `publish: Internal`. It is not clear what it should look like, if at all, when `publish: External`

Author: Updated with f512a3c77d5f811401e7ecd675e4227bd8c694d7 to only modify the file from `Internal` to `External`

You should exclude the firewall section when deploying into a Shared VPC unless the service account used by the installer has sufficient permissions in the host project.

Copy [`03_firewall.py`](../../../upi/gcp/03_firewall.py) locally.
Copy [`03_iam.py`](../../../upi/gcp/03_iam.py) locally.

Create a resource definition file: `03_security.yaml`

```console
$ cat <<EOF >03_security.yaml
imports:
- path: 03_firewall.py
- path: 03_iam.py
resources:
- name: cluster-firewall
  type: 03_firewall.py
  properties:
    infra_id: '${INFRA_ID}'
    cluster_network: '${CLUSTER_NETWORK}'
    network_cidr: '${NETWORK_CIDR}'
- name: cluster-iam
  type: 03_iam.py
  properties:
    infra_id: '${INFRA_ID}'
EOF
```
- `infra_id`: the infrastructure name (INFRA_ID above)
- `region`: the region to deploy the cluster into (for example us-east1)
- `cluster_network`: the URI to the cluster network
- `network_cidr`: the CIDR of the vpc network (for example 10.0.0.0/16)

Create the deployment using gcloud.

```sh
gcloud deployment-manager deployments create ${INFRA_ID}-security --config 03_security.yaml
```

## Configure security variables
Configure the variables based on the `03_security.yaml` deployment.

> If you excluded the IAM section, ensure these are set to the .selfLink of their associated resources.

Author: .selfLink is wrong here.

Author: Updated with 998a518a17e54a792bd52cf31b217775eb20f5a3

```

## Configure VPC variables
Configure the variables based on the VPC created with `01_vpc.yaml`.

> If you are using a pre-existing VPC, such as a Shared VPC, set these to the .selfLink of the targeted resources.

Reviewer: This is not clear. i think gcloud command to show what it will be should be useful.

Author: Do the exports that follow not serve as an example?

```

## Configure VPC variables
Configure the variables based on the VPC created with `01_vpc.yaml`.

> If you are using a pre-existing VPC, such as a [Shared VPC][sharedvpc], set these to the .selfLink of the targeted resources.

Reviewer: `` `.selfLink` ``

Author: Resolved in 657a91d789da80eb9e2e96efc4ded29f490d64a9

```

## Add DNS entries
The templates do not create DNS entries due to limitations of Deployment Manager, so we must create them manually.

> If you are installing into a Shared VPC, use the `--account` and `--project` parameters to perform these actions in the host project.

Reviewer: separate out the XPN case to a different paragraph.

Author: Updated with 998a518a17e54a792bd52cf31b217775eb20f5a3

```

## Create firewall rules and IAM roles
Create the firewall rules and IAM roles for the cluster.
You can exclude either of these by removing their associated section(s) from the `02_infra.yaml`.
If you choose to do so, you will need to create the required resources some other way.

> You should exclude the firewall section when deploying into a Shared VPC unless the service account used by the installer has sufficient permissions in the host project.

Reviewer: https://github.com/openshift/installer/pull/3278/commits/bfbfe67adaf0061d5d7af8ae9b860077420a3e6e#r391335165

Author: Updated with 998a518a17e54a792bd52cf31b217775eb20f5a3

```

## Configure security variables
Configure the variables based on the `03_security.yaml` deployment.

> If you excluded the IAM section, ensure these are set to the .email of their associated resources.

Reviewer: `` `.email` ``

Author: Resolved in 657a91d789da80eb9e2e96efc4ded29f490d64a9

If you are installing into a [Shared VPC (XPN)][sharedvpc],
use the `--account` and `--project` parameters to perform these actions in the host project.

### Add the health check firewall rule.
Add the firewall rule to allow the gce health checks to access all services.
This enables the ingress load balancers to determine the health status of their instances.

```sh
gcloud compute firewall-rules create --allow='tcp:30000-32767,udp:30000-32767' --network="${CLUSTER_NETWORK}" --source-ranges='130.211.0.0/22,35.191.0.0/16,209.85.152.0/22,209.85.204.0/22' --target-tags="${INFRA_ID}-master,${INFRA_ID}-worker" ${INFRA_ID}-ingress-hc
```

### Add the service firewall rules.
Add the ingress firewall rules for inbound service traffic.
If you want your cluster to be private, you can use `--source-ranges=${NETWORK_CIDR}`.
This rule may need to be updated accordingly when adding services on ports other than `tcp:80,tcp:443`.

```sh
gcloud compute firewall-rules create --allow='tcp:80,tcp:443' --network="${CLUSTER_NETWORK}" --source-ranges="0.0.0.0/0" --target-tags="${INFRA_ID}-master,${INFRA_ID}-worker" ${INFRA_ID}-ingress
```

> 

Reviewer: afaik, the kube-controller-manger (gcp) emits events for the firewall rules that need to be created for **each** load balancer service.

so i think we should make it clear that the example here is opening up everything when technically they should be using those events to create specific ones. an example of what the event looks like and how to do that would be useful here.

Author: I'll make it clear this is opening everything up. I'm not sure what the event looks like because I did not see them in my testing.

Author: Reworked this section. PTAL 67658b5fca0aeaa92b80e428086fdd30037dfc9d
